Under His Nose
By Bruno Lessing
Illustrated by William Oberhardt

Lezinsky: "What comes easy, goes easy! I make money: I spend it. I fall in love: I fall out again!” 
Cohen:	"Ha! Ha! Ha!”

-The Greenhorn


You probably never heard of "The Greenhorn." It is a play-comedy in five or six acts (there may be seven or eight), written by my friend Gimplovitz. The quotation selected above conveys a fairly adequate idea of the humor that ripples through it. Whenever one of Gimplovitz's characters says anything that Gimplovitz thinks is humorous another character immediately laughs—"Ha ! Ha! Ha!" "The Greenhorn" has never been produced upon any stage, nor has it ever been published in any form. In fact, I am quite sure that this is the first and only mention it has ever received in public. And even in private but few eyes have ever deciphered the· Yiddish words, and few ears have ever heard Gimplovitz, with tears of laughter running down his plump cheeks, read the lines aloud. Miska, his daughter; Emil, the head waiter; Ratkowsky, who owned the little theater in Delancey Street; and I—these probably are all who ever read "The Greenhorn" or heard it read. Oh, yes, there was Sammy Levy, to be sure. He almost knew it by heart.
	Nor was "The Greenhorn" the only comedy that Gimplovitz had written. There were about thirty-five others, all in Yiddish, all dealing with Ghetto life, and all in their original manuscript. I remember distinctly "The Pedler of Hester Street," "The Rabbi

[660] 

from Odessa," "The Synagogue Scapegoat," and "His Third Wife." The names of the others have slipped from my memory, but I know that they were all comedies, varying from five to eight acts, profusely interspersed with outbursts of laughter from the characters and nearly every one of them endorsed with the signature of Ratkowsky under the statement that he regretted that he could not accept it. I asked Gimplovitz why he never wrote less than five acts. He smiled beamingly.
	"If the idea is funny," he replied, "you cannot have too much of it. The funnier it is the longer I make it. I want the audience to get their money's worth and to enjoy the play as much as I enjoyed writing it."
	"The audience" was always uppermost in Gimplovitz's mind. He would not write a line, study a gesture, or give minute instructions for the actions of his characters without calculating carefully the effect upon the audience. Surely there never was a man who deserved an audience more than Gimplovitz did.
	In the old days he had been a comedian in a Yiddish theater in Warsaw. His face, round, plastic, and good natured, was the typical comedian's face, and there was something about him that suggested the stage even to the most casual observer. When he came to this country there were no Yiddish theaters in the Ghetto, and Gimplovitz went to work in a coffee-house. He saved money, started a place for himself, and prospered, and throughout the East Side to-day the Café Gimplovitz is as well known as the biggest synagogue. Gimplovitz began to take things easy. Emil, the head waiter, looked after the business of the cafe; Miska, his 'daughter, handled the money; and Gimplovitz wrote comedies. Every time I went there he unfolded to me the plot of a new comedy that he was writing, and he always laughed when he told it. There never was a man so proud of his sense of humor as was Gimplovitz.
	Ratkowsky came there nearly every day. In the afternoon he would drop in for an hour or so to sip coffee, and as soon as the performance at his theater was over he would return to drink kummel. And he would drink kummel until Miska yawned and said she was going to bed. Then Ratkowsky would yawn and say he was going home. Gimplovitz took it for granted that Ratkowsky came there because of the bond of professional sympathy that existed between them. Ratkowsky had declined every one of his comedies, but always spurred him on to renewed efforts. "Some day you will strike the right thing, and then I will make you a rich man," was what he always told Gimplovitz.
	The rest of us, however, knew that Ratkowsky came to the cafe on Miska's account. There were many others who came there for the same reason, and you would never have wondered at it if you could have seen Miska when she was nineteen. But these, since they came openly to see her and admire her and some even to make love to her, soon learned that Miska was heart—whole and kind to all alike, and they took their medicine and became her very good friends. Ratkowsky, however, was of the crafty, persistent kind. He would sit silent for hours, smoking incessantly and gazing furtively at Miska whenever she was not looking. Sammy Levy, on the other hand, made no secret of his infatuation. In fact, he was so open in his admiration of Miska and sang her praises so loudly that no one took him seriously. Besides which he was only a·clerk in a dry-goods store, and it was generally known that Gimplovitz had decided that Miska should marry a wealthy man.
	"Ratkowsky," said Gimplovitz one night, "I have a feeling that my next comedy will be the greatest work of my life."
	Ratkowsky puffed at his cigar and narrowed his eyes. "What is the plot?" he asked.
	"I don't know," replied Gimplovitz serenely. "I haven't thought of a plot yet.	I'm putting the finishing touches to 'The Schatchen's Revenge,' and I shall not touch anything else until that is finished. But something tells me—something in my heart—that my next work will be my masterpiece."
	"It is probably something in your liver," said Ratkowsky. Then, leaning forward with the air of a man who has made a sudden determination,. he said:
	"Listen to me, Gimplovitz. Do not move. And, above all, do not look at Miska. I don't want her to know what we are talking about. I am in love with your daughter. Do not stare at me so. She will suspect something. I want to marry her. All I need is your consent. She is young. I can wait a year. I am in no hurry. I will give her a beautiful home. And you and I will write plays together. You have wonderful ideas for comic plays. But I have the experience. Also the theater. And I will put all your plays on the 

[661] 

stage. Do not say anything to Miska for a while. Then gradually prepare her mind. You will know.how to do it. You are a smart man. You know what I mean. I am going home. Good night!"
	Gimplovitz sat motionless for nearly an hour. Then he smiled—the smile of a man who is satisfied with life's outlook.
	"Miska," he said that night, "Mr. Ratkowsky is a fine man."
	"Yes," replied Miska slowly, to his great delight. " I like him very much."
	But he did not observe that Miska had become quite pale and that she trembled slightly. Years later Miska told me that the moment her father spoke she understood the whole situation. When I asked her why and how, she smiled and shrugged her shoulders—and how pretty her shoulders were!—and said she did not know. Which only shows that you never can tell about a woman.
	I observed, however, that Sammy Levy's visits to the Café Gimplovitz became less frequent and that upon the occasions when I found him there he was not vociferous in his praises of Miska. In fact, they had very little to say to
each other—at least, so far as any of the regular frequenters of the cafe observed. Gimplovitz meanwhile was struggling to conceive a great humorous idea. He explained the situation to me.
       "This must be the funniest idea that ever was produced on the stage. Ratkowsky has promised to produce it if I write it. I have thought of fifty ideas, but not one of them is quite good enough. Do you happen to have a funny idea?" 
	I explained to Gimplovitz that funny ideas were worth their weight in radium and that I had great need of every one that ever occurred to me. He sighed.
	"You are right," said he. "We humorists realize the value of a good idea. The average person thinks it is easy to be funny. Little do people realize what a serious business humor is."
	That, I think, is about the only point upon which I ever agreed with Gimplovitz. It was interesting, nevertheless, to watch his countenance as he strove for this idea that would not come, smiling, every now and then, as a humorous thought flitted through his head, and then frowning after he had weighed it and found it wanting. I saw him nearly every night for two weeks, and during all that time the idea would not come. Never was there such a stubborn idea! Gimplovitz concentrated his whole brain upon the subject, his forehead was constantly wrinkled with lines of thought, his lips were tightly pressed together with the determination of a man who means to do or die, and all his intellect strove with might and main to bring forth that idea. Yet it came not, and Gimplovitz

[662]

gradually became very irritable and peevish. When Emil, the head waiter, spoke to him of the details of the café management Gimplovitz would reply:
	"Don't bother me! Can't you see I'm busy? "
	And inasmuch as he had been sitting motionless in his chair for several hours this naturally puzzled Emil very much. His old cronies knew enough to give him a wide berth while he was in this mood. It was Sammy Levy who first broke in upon Gimplovitz's silent battle with his muse and, incidentally, was the means of solving Gimplovitz's problem.
	Sammy was not quite as lively as usual that evening. His smiling, debonair manner had lef t him: he seemed quite serious and even a trifle nervous.
	"Mr. Gimplovitz,” he said simply, "I'd like to marry Miska. Have you any objection ? "
	Gimplovitz slowly removed his glasses and gazed fixedly at Sammy. Sammy moved his chair a trifle nearer the door.
"Say it again!" said Gimplovitz.
	Sammy frowned. "I said I'd like to marry Miska, and I want to know if you have any objection. Just say 'yes' or 'no.' That's all I want to know."
	"Yes," replied Gimplovitz. "I have very decided objection to your marrying my daughter. Don't be a fool."
"I'm not a fool,” protested Sammy.
	"How could you support a wife, in the first place?" asked Gimplovitz.
	"I'd expect that you'd let me run the café," replied Sammy. "And even if you didn't, I can make enough for two, and pretty soon I'll get a raise."
	Gimplovitz stared at him as if he could not credit his hearing. "Expect to run the cafe for me? H'm! I take back what I said. You're not such a fool. You are very smart. In fact, you are altogether too smart. Now please go away and do not bother me and never speak to me about it again."
	Sammy opened his mouth as if he were about to speak, but instead he smiled and went off whistling. Gimplovitz's eyes turned to where his daughter stood talking with one of the patrons of the place. She was smiling and looked perfectly happy. Gimplovitz beckoned to her.
	"Be a little careful about talking with that chap Sammy Levy," he said, in the most casual tone of voice. "He just asked me if he could marry you, and I had to give him a piece of my mind. The little fool!"
	"Why, the idea!" Miska exclaimed—a very illuminating exclamation when you come to think of it—and then she resumed her conversation with the customer. But two hours later a wonderful change came over Gimplo? vitz; he began to beam and glow, then he rose and paced the floor and patted himself upon the chest. Then he came to where I sat.
       "I have it!" he whispered exultingly. 
       "What have you got?" I asked.
	"The idea! It has just come to me. It will make the greatest comedy I ever wrote. Wonderful how those ideas come! A moment ago my mind was a perfect blank, and now I see the whole play before my eyes. Ah! It will be my masterpiece.
	"Listen," he went on. "There was a young idiot in here just a little while ago who asked me if he could marry Miska. Do you know, it quite upset me. But I took pains that he should know it was entirely hopeless and give it up. Nevertheless I became worried. Supposing, I thought, he should come around and make love to her. I spoke to Miska. That settled that point. Every time he comes here I will keep an eye on him. And he cannot see her outside because she never goes out alone. Everything is safe. But then, thought I, supposing in some way he should come in here and, without my knowing it—right under my nose, so to speak? make love to her and coax her to marry him without my consent. And presto! there was the whole plot for my comedy. Of course it would be impossible for a smart man like me, but supposing some father got fooled like that? Hey? Right under his nose! Hey? That's what I'm going to call the play? 'Under His Nose.' How's that for a title?" 
       "Fine!" I exclaimed. "Everybody will go to see a play by that name."
	He nodded approvingly. "All I have to do now," he went on, "is to think up some. way in which the young man can steal the girl right under her father's nose, so that he won't suspect."
	To Ratkowsky, who arrived a few minutes later, he unfolded the outline of this new idea without, however, going into the details of how he had conceived it.
	"It may be good," said Ratkowsky, "and it may not be good. I will wait until you have written it."
	The next day Miska asked her father if she could go out alone for a little while. " I


[664]	

think a little air will do me good," she said. 
       Gimplovitz smiled. "In a little while Emil will be back," said he, "and then you can go out. I will go with you because I need a little air, too."
	When next I saw Gimplovitz he had made but little progress with his plot. "It is not so easy," he said. "I have plenty of funny ideas, but the trouble is the audience would not believe them. The audience must al? ways be made to believe that what they see really happened. No matter how funny it is it must be something that is likely to have happened. Now, for instance, I thought of the father and daughter out walking when the young man comes along in an automobile or a flying-machine. If it was an automobile he could ask the father to fix something underneath, and while the old gentleman was lying under the machine he could lift the girl into the automobile and run off with her. An automobile elopement on the stage could be made very funny. I could put in a rival who does something to the machinery so that it won't go. Or it might be a flying-machine. I was reading about them in the paper the other day, and I know just how we could fix one up on the stage. But I don't feel that I've got the right start yet. You don't happen to think of any idea, do you ?"
	"Why not have the hero bring the father a bottle of champagne with some drug in it to put him asleep? " I suggested glibly.
	Gimplovitz shook his head. "The father is· too suspicious," he said. "He would not take anything from the young man.”
       "That's the only idea I have," I said.
	Gimplovitz	sighed.	"It's hard! Very, very hard!" he said. "Little does the world know what an effort our humor costs us!"
	Day after day Gimplovitz grappled with this new problem, but without avail. During this time Sammy Levy had resumed his daily visits to the cafe. Immediately upon entering he would go to the counter behind which Miska sat and exchange a few words with her, usually loud enough for the whole room to hear, and then he would sit in the farthest corner of the room, chatting animatedly with his companions and, usually, with his back turned to Miska. One night he came in with two friends who had never been in the place
before. He introduced them to Miska, and with a return of his old jovial manner presented them also to her father.	Gimplovitz only grunted. His mind was upon his comedy. A few nights later Sammy brought intwo more friends and went through the same performance. These four men, within a week, became nightly habitues of the place, and Gimplovitz soon became accustomed to the sight of the four of them gathered around Miska's place, chatting animatedly about the weather, the latest play, or the most recent newspaper sensation.
	And then, one night—it was in the spring? time, and the vernal languor was in the air—Sammy Levy entered with his four friends. They all gathered around Miska, while Gimplovitz, biting the end of a lead-pencil and gazing abstractedly at the ceiling, sat some twenty feet away, still searching for his idea. Then there trickled into his brain the conscious? ness that a great quiet had fallen upon the room, and he came back to earth and looked around him. One of Sammy Levy's friends was advancing toward him with outstretched hand, and behind him stood Miska, crying softly, but not from unhappiness. Gimplovitz sprang to his feet.
	"I'm the alderman from this district," said the man who approached him. "My friend Sammy wanted me to come around and perform a little ceremony and—I've performed it. Now look here, old man, don't take it that way!" Gimplovitz had collapsed into a chair. "Let you and I sit down and talk it over like two sensible men!"
	Gimplovitz brought his first down upon the table with a crash. "The lying scoundrel! The villainous loafer! The impudent wretch! The thief!"
       The torrent lasted quite a long while, and the alderman could not help admiring Gimplovitz's fluency and the wide range of his diction. He did not repeat a single epithet. But Gimplovitz happened to look around and observe that Miska and her husband had disappeared. He ran to the door, looked up
and down the street, and, failing to distinguish them, cried aloud, so that all the neighborhood could hear,
       "Loafer!"

*	*	*

	Since Sammy Levy has taken charge of the café, Gimplovitz spends most of his time at home writing comedies, and I do not see him as of ten as formerly. The last time I met him I asked him if he had worked out the solution of his problem.
       "You mean 'Under His Nose'?"
       I nodded. Gimplovitz shook his head.
	"I gave it up," he said, and after a pause added sadly, "It wasn't such a funny idea!"

